Avengers: Age of Ultron review - Whedon's heroic cavalcade of fun 

The follow-up to The Avengers may be the harbinger of a new deluge of 
superhero movies, but if all turn out as entertaining as this one, what's 
the problem?

Recently, there has been a shrill cultural panic at the thought of all 
the superhero movies due to be released in the next few years: Ant-Man, 
Captain America: Civil War, Doctor Strange, Guardians of the Galaxy 2, 
The Spectacular Spider-Man, Thor: Ragnarok, Avengers: Infinity War Part 
1, Black Panther, Captain Marvel, Avengers: Infinity War Part 2, Batman 
vs Superman: Dawn Of Justice... the list goes on. But what's the problem? 
For me, it's no more of an issue than all the romcoms and horror the 
business is readying at the far end of the chute, and this exotic new 
strain of supers could well be stimulating the industry. And there's 
certainly no problem if they're as exuberant, funny, silly and crazily 
exhilarating as this new Avengers movie from writer-director Joss Whedon, 
which is a pure aspartame rush.

Once again, the Avengers have assembled under the mercurial and possibly 
duplicitous leadership of Tony Stark, otherwise Iron Man, played with 
the usual single-breath delivery of throwaway wisecracks by Robert 
Downey Jr. It's a role which now threatens or promises to define his 
whole career. Previously, I have described the assembled Avengers as 
the Traveling Wilburys of superheroism. Now they are more like a G7 
summit of world-saving and crime-fighting with every constituent member 
becoming a veritable Angela Merkel of demurely offbeat virility.

Mark Ruffalo is excellent as the troubled and introspective Dr Bruce 
Banner, for whom Hulk transition is not in and of itself a problem. The 
issue now is the way in which he must be coaxed into remorphing into 
human form and Black Widow, nicely played by Scarlett Johansson, is 
becoming the Hulk whisperer. The intuitive tenderness with which she 
deals with Banner/Hulk is turning into a sweet love affair: it seems to 
involve a great deal of delicately erotic hand-holding: her tiny hand in 
his galumphing green mitt; yet Dr Banner is holding back from returning 
her love, unwilling to burden her with his terrible rage potential. 
Chris Hemsworth is Thor, continuously resident on Earth for the time 
being and without claims from Asgard to distract him. (My one quarrel 
with the film is that Tom Hiddleston's Loki doesn't show up.) Chris 
Evans's Captain America is a stolid reminder of wartime values and 
Jeremy Renner is Hawkeye, whose bow and arrow make him the quaintest 
and yet most romantic warrior of the group.

But now they find themselves up against a couple of new enemies: Pietro 
Maximoff, or Quicksilver, played by Aaron Taylor-Johnson, and his twin 
sister Wanda Maximoff, or Scarlet Witch, played by Elizabeth Olsen. 
They are blessed variously with super speed and mind control (as one 
character puts it, "he's fast; she's weird") and Scarlet Witch almost 
immediately uses her head-messing capabilities to show a secretly 
aghast Stark how he might betray and even destroy his fellow Avengers.

But more importantly, Stark begins to experiment (without his comrades' 
knowledge) with an artificial intelligence programme that could impose 
absolute power on Earth, supposedly to repel all enemies: this 
insubstantial mega-brain, like a floating blue jellyfish, instantly 
goes rogue, becoming a terrifyingly dangerous new enemy named Ultron, 
appropriating a new exoskeleton, and becoming a bizarro version of his 
effective creator: Stark. Ultron uses the blandly Chamberlain-esque 
phrase "peace in our time" to describe its planned totalitarian rule, 
the Pax Ultronica, and the irony will hardly be lost on the second 
world war veteran Captain America. The Avengers realise that they are 
actually fighting against a hideously parodic version of their own 
ally: Stark, his worst and perhaps even strongest self.

It's all operatically mad, and the city-destroying final confrontation 
is becoming a bit familiar, but Whedon carries it off with such joy and 
even a kind of evangelism. His script is a thing of wonder, jam-packed 
with great lines: I loved Stark's wearied remark: "I've had a long day... 
Eugene O'Neill long..." And the unresolved romantic and sexual tension 
between Black Widow and Hulk creates a weird driving force to the 
narrative: even the absurdity is somehow recirculated into the film's 
internal economy as comedy and irony and the cast-of-thousands effect 
never seems to split the focus: Andy Serkis plays metal trader Ulysses 
Klaw and Julie Delpy has a blink-and-you'll-miss-it cameo as Black 
Widow's sinister former controller. It's a superhero cavalcade of energy 
and fun.
