Film Review: 'Guardians of the Galaxy'

A motley crew of mercenaries and mutants are the galaxy's last best hope 
in Marvel's gently subversive superhero sendup.

If the wayward denizens of "Star Wars'" Mos Eisley Cantina rose up and 
demanded their own starring vehicle, it would probably look something 
like "Guardians of the Galaxy," an alt-"Avengers" in which a ragtag band 
of misfits and mercenaries make the world a safer place almost by 
accident. An unusually prankish and playful Marvel Studios vehicle, 
director James Gunn's presumptive franchise-starter is overlong, 
overstuffed and sometimes too eager to please, but the cheeky comic tone 
keeps things buoyant - as does Chris Pratt's winning performance as the 
most blissfully spaced-out space crusader this side of Buckaroo Banzai. 
While these "Guardians" seem unlikely to challenge the box office 
benchmarks set by their Marvel brethren, this inaugural outing should 
nevertheless inject some much-needed life into Hollywood's sagging 
summer fortunes.

Introduced in the January 1969 issue of "Marvel Super-Heroes," the 
Guardians have been spun off, recast and rebooted several times over 
the decades, though largely in keeping with creators Arnold Drake and 
Gene Colan's vision of an intergalactic (and interspecies) Dirty Dozen 
traveling through time and space to protect the universe from various 
unfriendlies. For the film, Gunn and co-writer Nicole Perlman have taken 
most of their inspiration from the 2008 incarnation of the series 
created by Dan Abnett and Andy Lanning, which offered a new Guardians 
team consisting of various supporting players from the Marvel annals, 
all under the questionable leadership of one Peter Quill (aka Star-Lord), a half-human, half-alien space jockey with a comically square jaw and an air of preening self-regard.
But perhaps because the "Guardians" source material isn't as sacrosanct
as the likes of "Captain America" or "Thor," the filmmakers seem to have 
been given more than the usual license to play and reinvent. They've 
tossed out a few regular characters (including the messianic "cosmic 
being" Adam Warlock), reduced others to insider cameos (look fast for 
Cosmo the telepathic Russian space dog), and made haste with the 
comic's pesky space-time fissures in favor of a more streamlined, 
accessible storyline. Above all, they've turned Quill (Pratt) into an 
amiable, good-vibing doofus who seems congenitally incapable of taking 
anything seriously but can, when the occasion demands, kick serious 
butt.

When we first see Quill, he seems more garbage man than guardian, a 
galactic scavenger working in the employ of blue-skinned Yondu (Michael 
Rooker), his adoptive father (and, in Marvel lore, one of the original, 
'60s-era Guardians). In a scene lovingly modeled on the opening sequence 
from "Raiders of the Lost Ark," Quill enters a cave on an abandoned 
planet to retrieve a mysteriously powerful silver orb and, instead of a 
rousing John Williams fanfare, the soundtrack erupts with Native 
American rockers Redbone singing "Come and Get Your Love." It's the 
first of many '70s FM classics (Blue Swede, Elvin Bishop, Ashford and 
Simpson) that emanate from the mix tape inside Quill's trusty Walkman, 
and which give "Guardians" a funky, off-kilter energy even when the 
plotting turns toward the conventional. (Where else have you ever seen 
a prison break scored to "The Pina Colada Song"?)

If the Avengers are Marvel's top-of-the-class all-stars, the Guardians 
are its underachieving freaks and geeks, and Gunn and Perlman have 
essentially crafted a new origin story about how these riff-raffers 
come together to keep said orb (a variant on "The Avengers'" hot-potato 
Tesseract) out of the hands of Ronan the Accuser (Lee Pace), a 
warmongering baddie hellbent on destroying the Earth-like planet Xandar. 
Fighting the good fight alongside Quill are Gamora (sci-fi "it" girl 
Zoe Saldana), rebellious daughter of an even bigger baddie called 
Thanos; the hulking, elaborately tattooed Drax (ex-WWE wrestling champ 
Dave Bautista), who holds Ronan responsible for the death of his family; 
a genetically modified humanoid raccoon named Rocket (voiced by Bradley 
Cooper); and his resident muscle, an anthropomorphic tree called Groot 
(voiced by Vin Diesel).

It's difficult to imagine Gunn being asked to do anything like a 
straight comicbook movie on the basis of his previous "Super" (2010), 
a darkly funny, brutally violent portrait of superheroism as a kind of 
psychopathy. With its large budget and crowd-pleasing ambitions, 
"Guardians of the Galaxy" can't venture nearly as far out on a limb, 
but to Gunn's credit, he's delivered a movie that's idiosyncratic enough 
to stand out from the crowd without ever crossing over into the 
full-tilt dadaism of a "Buckaroo Banzai." The adventures here comprise 
a fairly standard set of Saturday-serial cliffhangers and hairsbreadth 
escapes, and Gunn puts them across with a B-movie savoir faire that 
keeps "Guardians" from ever getting too high on the hog or too bogged 
down in its own mythmaking. Even when we arrive at the requisite 
CG-enhanced scenes of competing entities zipping and zapping each other 
with waves of electromagnetic energy, the movie retains a welcome 
lightness of touch, as if to say, "Yes, the fate of the universe hangs 
in the balance, but what else is new?"

For all that Gunn and Perlman have pared away, "Guardians" still has 
more characters and incidents than it quite knows what to do with, some 
of which seem planted here as seeds for the inevitable sequel. Benicio 
Del Toro pops up briefly as an exotic "collector" who looks like 
Liberace after a bleaching accident, while Glenn Close is around just 
long enough as a senior Xandar peacekeeper to make you wonder how many 
man-hours went into crafting her elaborate hair bun. "Doctor Who" 
co-star Karen Gillan is so hastily introduced as another daughter of 
Thanos that, when she eventually comes into possession of the orb, it 
takes a moment to remember who she even is.

But the core characters are lovingly fleshed out by the performers, 
especially Pratt, who seems to be grooving to his own private soundtrack 
even when he doesn't have his headphones in his ears, and Cooper and 
Diesel, who nearly walk off with the movie as a couple of fractious yet 
inseparable platonic soulmates firmly in the R2D2/C3PO mold. (It helps 
that their computer-animated avatars are both marvelously detailed and 
seamlessly integrated into the live-action scenes.) Cooper is so good 
at finding the pathos in his existentially conflicted critter that you 
half expect the little guy to plead "I am not an animal!" Except, of 
course, he is.

Elsewhere, the movie sports a rich, varied look courtesy of 
cinematographer Ben Davis ("Kick-Ass") and production designer Charles 
Wood, from the rusty, tiered interior of the floating prison known as 
the Kyln to the anodyne pastels of Xandar, which suggests a cross 
between Oz and Century City. Special effects makeup designer David 
White does a superb job of creating distinctive looks for the movie's 
expansive gallery of humanoid and alien species.
