Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 2 Is Great - But All Too Familiar

If there's one truism in comic-book moviemaking, it's that giant 
superhero team-ups are almost always sure-fire hits. (And then there's 
*Fantastic Four; *there are some things reshoots and wigs just can't 
cover up.) What's less true is that superhero team-up sequels will have 
the same good fortune. All the right ingredients can be there-good cast, 
same director, bomb-ass CGI - and for whatever reason, the movie just 
doesn't ascend as high as its predecessor. Such is the case with 
Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 2.

Like any good mixtape, James Gunn serves up a steady vibe, and it's a 
familiar one to fans of 2014's GOTG. Peter Quill/Star-Lord (Chris Pratt) 
still has his cock-of-the-Walkman swagger; Gamora (Zoe Saldana) continues 
to kick ass and thwart Quill's advances; Drax (Dave Bautista) has 
perfected being the living embodiment of Big Dumb Fun; and Rocket (voiced 
by Bradley Cooper) managed to maintain a bottomless reserve of dickish 
rejoinders. The only perceptible difference this time around comes 
courtesy of Groot - well, Baby Groot, a marble-eyed CGI bundle of 
emotional manipulation who has been raking in the dawwwws since the 
first trailer dropped.

But as long as we're talking mixtapes, think back to the first mixtape 
your crush gave you. You remember the songs, the sequence, even the 
smell of the air wherever you listened to it. Now, quick: What was on 
the second mixtape they made you? You remember some of it, but chances 
are you're having a tougher time remember if the opening track was by 
Steely Dan or Stevie Nicks. Or, y'know, any non-1978 equivalent. That 
doesn't mean Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 2 isn't fun. If you like 
superhero flirting, bonding, and not-too-graphic dick jokes, it's a 
hoot. There might even be a tearjerker or two. But if you're hoping for 
something radically different from the first Guardians, you might be 
disappointed.

There is, of course, one new prominent member to the Guardians 
supergroup this time around - and he's the one that causes all the drama 
and makes it all worth it. As Ego, Kurt Russell plays the role of 
Living Planet/Father of Star-Lord perfectly. The first film, you'll 
remember, focused a lot on Quill not knowing who his father was and 
simultaneously finding a new family in his fellow Guardians. Side B 
is Quill meeting Ego, who claims to be his dad and also, by his mere 
presence, threatens to break up that family in its infancy. And 
Russell, being the most Kurt Russell he can be, walks the line between 
Charmer and Do We Trust Him? with ease. In fact, he brings more 
multi-dimensionality to Vol. 2 than anyone else (to wit: his analysis 
of the Looking Glass song "Brandy (You're a Fine Girl)").

Also new to the galaxy is Ayesha (Elizabeth Debicki), the leader of a 
superior(-acting) gold-skinned group known as the Sovereigns, who are 
out to get the Guardians for stealing some of their highly-valuable 
batteries. It's her quest for retribution that ultimately brings back 
fan-favorite Yondu (Michael Rooker), whom she sends after the Guardians 
and who loses favor with his fellow Ravagers for seemingly going soft 
on Star-Lord, and leads to the movie's final showdown. (Speaking of 
which, see this movie in 3-D, if you can, it's really quite beautiful.) 
Ayesha will, no doubt, also play a role in the larger Marvel Cinematic 
Universe, so keep an eye on what she does.

All of this adds up to a movie that is, no doubt, a joy. The humor - 
even if it, like Drax's laughter, feels forced-is there. So is the 
camaraderie, and the stunning visuals, and the super-fun soundtrack. 
There's no reason to think that fans of the last Guardians movie, and 
Marvel movies in general, won't love it. It just might feel like the 
second time around the same dancefloor. Towards the end of Vol. 2 
someone (we won't spoil who) gives Star-Lord a "new" music device. The 
joke is that it's a Zune. After marveling that it can hold "300 songs?!" 
he scrolls through the menu and, like he did at the end of the last 
movie, fires up a track. It's Cat Stevens' "Father and Son." Peter 
Quill - like Marvel, like James Gunn, like this movie itself - knows how 
to shut up and play the hits.
