Learning to Be Washington

George Washington's corpse was scarcely a month in its grave when an 
enterprising minister from Maryland named Mason Locke Weems made a pitch 
to a Philadelphia publisher. "I've got something to whisper in your 
lug," Weems wrote in January 1800. "Washington, you know is gone! 
Millions are gaping to read something about him. . . . My plan! I 
give his history, sufficiently minute" and "go on to show that his 
unparalleled rise & elevation were due to his Great Virtues." Weems was 
on to something. His sentimental and often fictional biography became a 
best seller, the first in a seemingly endless stream of studies of the 
man who led the Continental Army to victory in the American War for 
Independence and who as the first president of the United States did 
more than anyone else to establish the legitimacy of a national 
government merely outlined in the Constitution of 1787. Today, books 
about Washington continue to appear at such an astonishing rate that 
the publication of Ron Chernow's prompts the inevitable question: Why 
another one? 

An obvious answer is that Chernow is no ordinary writer. Like his 
popular biographies of John D. Rockefeller and Alexander Hamilton, his 
"Washington" while long, is vivid and well paced. If Chernow's sense 
of historical context is sometimes superficial, his understanding of 
psychology is acute and his portraits of individuals memorable. Most 
readers will finish this book feeling as if they have actually spent 
time with human beings. Given Chernow's considerable literary talent 
and the continued hunger of some Americans for a steady diet of tales 
of Washington and his exploits, what publisher could resist the prospect 
of adding "Washington: A Life" to its list? 

A more complicated answer lies in considering why we still long for 
news of Washington. To be sure, his life reflected, if it didn't 
epitomize, the once unimaginable transformation of several British 
colonies into an imperial Republic whose dominion extended to the 
Mississippi River. But Chernow and, I suspect, most of his readers 
are less interested in how the United States became the United 
States than in how George Washington became George Washington. 
Accepting the inevitability of our nation, they remain perplexed by 
the pre-eminence of this man. Chernow is far subtler and far more 
sophisticated than Weems. Yet there is a familiar ring to his desire 
to "elucidate the secrets" of Washington's "uncanny ability to lead a 
nation" by detailing his acquisition of such "exemplary virtues" as 
"unerring judgment, sterling character, rectitude, steadfast patriotism, 
unflagging sense of duty and civic-mindedness." What, we still wonder, 
was the secret of his success? 

Contemporaries, even those rivals who deeply resented him, observed 
that Washington seemed to be blessed by Divine Providence - or just 
plain luck. How else to explain the many bullets that whizzed around 
but never into his body? Or his emergence from a string of 
catastrophic military disasters in the French and Indian War and the 
War for Independence with a reputation enhanced rather than ruined? 
Over the past two centuries, scholars have detailed more prosaic 
explanations of Washington's "unparalleled rise & elevation," 
including his acquisition of thousands of acres through fortuitous 
inheritance and relentless speculation; his marriage to the wealthy 
widow Martha Dandridge Custis; his connection with members of the 
powerful Fairfax family, who became important early patrons; his 
struggle to master his body and his passions within the language 
and conventions of 18th-century Anglo-American republicanism; and 
most recently, his creative conflation of his personal ambition 
with the cause of the Republic. Chernow acknowledges all these 
interpretations of Washington's life. But because he tends to slide 
into the biographer's quicksand of identifying too closely with his 
subject, his particular contribution is to argue for the critical 
role Washington himself played in becoming George Washington. 

Few human beings have ever lived a life more self-consciously devoted 
to proving he merited his fame. In retrospect, Washington seems 
profoundly insecure. Given to dark moods and angry outbursts, 
especially at those who questioned his intentions, he compensated by 
studying rules of etiquette, mimicking successful older men, cultivating 
the loyalty of younger men and displaying an extraordinary sensitivity 
to what others thought of him. Nothing was more likely to provoke his 
legendary rage than accusations that he was motivated by a base motive. 
Like many of his peers, he made a great show of resisting public 
office, if only to demonstrate the absence of ambition. Washington 
fretted at length about the performance he would give from the balcony 
of Federal Hall in Lower Manhattan when he became president on April 30, 
1789. What should he wear? How should he behave? Knowing that "the first 
of everything in our situation will serve to establish a precedent," he 
wanted to avoid acting like a king while respecting the dignity of his 
office and the Republic it represented. Months earlier, he had decided 
he ought to say something, thereby inventing the presidential Inaugural 
Address. In an early draft, of which only fragments survive, Washington, 
Chernow writes, "spent a ridiculous amount of time defending his 
decision to become president, as if he stood accused of some heinous 
crime." This prickliness rarely surfaced in public. Indeed, he 
tirelessly cultivated an impassive demeanor that suited to perfection 
his preferred role as a remote, stoic figure towering above the sordid 
business of ordinary politics. 

But of course George Washington was anything but an uninterested 
observer. He didn't just learn from events; he shaped them to his own 
purposes. Throughout his career he wanted the gentlemen of Virginia 
and then the United States to master the landscape and peoples of 
North America as well as their bodies and emotions. Where Thomas 
Jefferson spent much of his life defying power, Washington imagined 
using power to improve transportation, encourage education, develop 
commerce, establish federal authority and unite the diverse regions 
of the sprawling Republic into an imposing whole that transcended the 
sum of its parts. "The name of AMERICAN," he said, must override any 
local attachments. 

To command respect and inspire emulation throughout the world, the 
United States had to balance liberty with order. This breathtaking 
imperial vision informed virtually everything Washington did. When 
he decided to provide for the freedom of most of his enslaved Africans 
upon the death of Martha Washington, he acted in good measure out of 
a conviction that "nothing but the rooting out of slavery can 
perpetuate the existence of our union, by consolidating it in a 
common bond of principle." 

Washington was concerned with his reputation and that of the nation he 
helped to found because he wisely understood that he could improve 
both through close attention to the expectations of others. But we are 
mistaken if we think he offered himself as a democratic example of how 
an ordinary person could succeed. The Washington who fashioned his 
public image did not believe he created the core of his character. 
To the contrary, his rise, he thought, served as proof that he was an 
extraordinary man who had always possessed exemplary talent and 
integrity. If he fretted about what posterity would think of him, it 
was probably because he doubted our willingness to acknowledge his 
greatness. On that score, at least, he needn't have worried. 
