Saguaro

The saguaro (Carnegiea 
gigantea) is an arborescent (tree-like) cactus species in the monotypic 
genus Carnegiea, which can grow to be over 40 feet (12 m) tall. It is 
native to the Sonoran Desert in Arizona, the Mexican State of Sonora, 
and the Whipple Mountains and Imperial County areas of California. The 
saguaro blossom is the state wildflower of Arizona. Its scientific name 
is given in honor of Andrew Carnegie. In 1994, Saguaro National Park, 
near Tucson, Arizona, was designated to help protect this species and 
its habitat.

The image of the saguaro is indelibly linked with that of the American 
Southwest, especially in western films. The common name saguaro came 
into the English language through the Spanish language, originating in 
the Mayo language.

Growth

Saguaros have a relatively long lifespan, often exceeding 150 years. 
They may grow their first side arm any time from 75-100 years of age, 
but some never grow any arms. A saguaro without arms is called a spear. 
Arms are developed to increase the plant's reproductive capacity, as 
more apices lead to more flowers and fruit.

The growth rate of saguaros is strongly dependent on precipitation; 
saguaros in drier western Arizona grow only half as fast as those in 
and around Tucson. Saguaros grow slowly from seed, never from cuttings, 
and grow to be over 40 feet (12.2 metres) in height.[3] The largest 
known living saguaro is the Champion Saguaro growing in Maricopa County,
 Arizona, measuring 45.3 feet (13.8 metres) high with a girth of 10 
 feet (3.1 metres). The tallest saguaro ever measured was an armless 
 specimen found near Cave Creek, Arizona. It was 78 feet (23.8 metres) 
 in height before it was toppled in 1986 by a windstorm.[4]
 
A saguaro is able to absorb and store considerable amounts of rainwater, 
visibly expanding in the process, while slowly using the stored water 
as needed. This characteristic enables the saguaro to survive during 
periods of drought.

Genome

The saguaro genome is around 1.5 billion base pairs long (about the 
half of the human genome's length). Sequencing has revealed that the 
genome of the saguaro's chloroplast is the smallest known among 
non-parasitic flowering plants.

Spines

The spines on a saguaro, less than two meters in height, rapidly grow 
up to a millimeter per day. When held up to the light or bisected, 
alternating light and dark bands transverse to the long axis of spines 
can be seen. These transverse bands have been correlated to daily 
growth. In columnar cacti, spines almost always grow in areoles which 
originate at the apex of the plant. A spine stops growing in its first 
season. Areoles are moved to the side and the apex continues to grow 
upwards. Thus, older spines are towards the base of a columnar cactus 
and newer spines are near the apex. Studies are underway to examine 
the relationship of carbon and oxygen isotope ratios in the tissues 
of spines of an individual to its climate and photosynthetic history 
(acanthochronology).

Flowers

Flowers appear in April through June. They are white and open well 
after sunset and close in mid-afternoon. They continue to produce 
nectar after sunrise.[7] Flowers are self-incompatible, thus require 
cross-pollination. Large quantities of pollen are required for 
complete pollination because many ovules are present. This pollen is 
produced by the extremely numerous stamens which in one case totaled 
3,482 in a single flower.[8] A well-pollinated fruit contains several 
thousand tiny seeds. Saguaros have a redundant pollination system, i.e. 
full fruit set is possible even if only a fraction of the pollinating 
species are present.

Main pollinators are honey bees, bats, and white-winged doves. In most 
years, diurnal visitors are the main contributors for fruit, most of 
them honey bees. Other diurnal pollinators are birds such as Costa's 
hummingbird, the black-chinned hummingbird, the broad-billed 
hummingbird, the hooded oriole, Scott's oriole, the Gila woodpecker, 
the gilded flicker, the verdin, and the house finch.[9]

The main nocturnal pollinator is the lesser long-nosed bat, feeding on 
the nectar. A number of floral characteristics are geared toward bat 
pollination: nocturnal opening of the flowers, nocturnal maturation of 
pollen, very rich nectar, position high above ground, durable blooms 
that can withstand a bat's weight, and fragrance emitted at night. 
Further, the amino acids in the pollen appear to help sustain lactation 
in bats.

Fruit

The ruby red fruits are 2.4 to 3.5 inches (6 to 9 cm) long and ripen in 
June. Each fruit contains around 2,000 seeds plus sweet fleshy 
connective tissue. The fruits are edible and prized by local people.

The fruits cannot be picked by hand, but must be harvested using a 
pole (often a saguaro rib) 7 to 16 feet (2 to 5 m) long, to the end 
of which is attached another pole.

The O'odham tribes have a long history of saguaro fruit use.[10] The 
Tohono O'odham tribes celebrate the beginning of their summer growing 
season with a ceremony using a fermented drink made from the bright 
red fruit to summon rains, vital for the crops.

Nests

Native birds such as Gila woodpeckers, purple martins, house finches, 
and gilded flickers live inside holes in saguaros. Flickers excavate 
larger holes higher on the stem.[11] The nest cavity is deep, and the 
parents and young are entirely hidden from view. The saguaro creates 
callus tissue on the wound. When the saguaro dies and its soft flesh 
rots, the callus remains as a so-called "saguaro boot", which was used 
by natives for storage.

The Gila woodpeckers (Melanerpes uropygialis) create new nest holes 
each season rather than reuse the old ones, leaving convenient nest 
holes for other animals, such as elf owls, flycatchers, and wrens.[12] 
In recent years, early-breeding, aggressive, non-native birds have 
taken over the nests to the detriment of elf owls that breed and nest 
later.

Laws

Harming a saguaro in any manner, including cactus plugging, is illegal 
by state law in Arizona, and when houses or highways are built, special 
permits must be obtained to move or destroy any saguaro affected.[13] 
Exceptions to this general understanding exist; for example, a private 
landowner whose property is 10 acres (4.0 ha) or less, where the initial 
construction has already occurred, may remove a saguaro from the 
property.[14] This is common when the cactus falls over in a storm, 
its location interferes with a house addition, or it becomes a potential 
hazard to humans.[15]

Contrary to published statements,[16] there is no law mandating prison 
sentences of 25 years for cutting a cactus down; however it is 
considered a class four felony.

Ethnobotany

The saguaro is an important source of food and shelter for the Tohono 
O'odham. Saguaro spines are sometimes used as sewing needles and the 
ribs are used to make harvesting tools.

The ribs of the saguaro were used for construction and other purposes by 
Native Americans. A fine example can be seen in the roofing of the 
cloisters of the Mission San Xavier del Bac on the Tohono O'odham lands 
near Tucson.

The Seri people of northwestern Mexico used the plant, which they call 
mojepe, for a number of purposes.

Location

The saguaro is often used as an emblem in commercials and logos that 
attempt to convey a sense of the Southwest, even if the product has no 
connection to Arizona or the Sonoran Desert. For instance, no naturally 
occurring saguaros are found within 250 miles (400 km) of El Paso, 
Texas, but the silhouette is found on the label of Old El Paso brand 
products.[18][19] Though the geographic anomaly has lessened in recent 
years, Western films once enthusiastically placed saguaros in Monument 
Valley of Arizona, as well as New Mexico, Utah, and Texas. The Dallas, 
Texas-based band, Reverend Horton Heat, pokes fun at this phenomenon in 
their song "Ain't no Saguaro in Texas".[20] No wild saguaros are found 
anywhere in New Mexico, Texas, Colorado, Utah, or Nevada, nor in the 
high deserts of northern Arizona.

